Nolan Estes was the superintendent of schools in
Dallas. It was the one that was here in 1970 in
February that made the presentation, our
graduate student and faculty. And this was,
again, one of these things that Frank Hubert had
done. He put together a series of seminars for the
graduate students in which all the graduate
students from throughout the college would
participate, in which they would participate.
Which, again, wanting to have them be exposed to
named people in the field, as well as having them be
able to meet those individuals. But it's
interesting how the graduate students reacted to
that. It was required. So they liked it very well. I
find it very interesting today we have graduate
students in our department that are asking for
such. If we required it, that's what they would
like it. That's funny. Do you feel, then, that this
has helped in how this college is viewed by
outsiders? Because this is so unique, and it's
something that just evolved, and it has only
happened here. Is that? I don't know as very many
people, even within the college, even know about
how that has really evolved and how it functions
today, because it does function so much like a
department.
Just a little aside about how these things can
benefit and create attitudes and so forth. I
referenced earlier that I was always able to get
the good faculty to teach, but there was a line item
that I referenced earlier in the Ed Psych budget
for a vocational guidance type person. After Dr.
Bowman went into other responsibilities and a
couple people went through that line, one year
that line was not filled by Ed Psych. And here I was
with a array of courses to teach, and I didn't have a
faculty member to teach that course because I had
to go to Ed Psych to get it. I had to hire someone on a
temporary basis to just teach that course. We were
doing many of the courses off campus, and our
philosophy was to use our on-campus faculty,
full-time faculty, to teach those. So in putting
my budget together that year, I moved the line from
Ed Psych to I went in to see, to share my budget with
Thank You Britain, not anticipating that that
line would be moved at all. I was simply using that
as a political ploy to make a point with him that,
hey, I was sure the faculty member at psych was
looking for a different, more of an educational
psychology type person than a cadence type
person. He turned around and picked up the phone
and called Art Roach, who was in the department,
and asked Art if they'd filled that position yet.
Art said, no. He said, well, that line item will be
in the IDE next year. Well, he made that decision
based upon a need that was out there, but you can
imagine the attitude toward Don Clark for a little
while right then. And so how do attitudes get
evolved? Maybe that was a cold decision he made.
From my perspective, it was one that needed to be
made, and he made it in a straightforward manner,
and no guessing on the part of insight why he made
it. It was simply something, do you want to fill the
position? We'll move it someplace else. That's
right. And I guess in a sense, that was another
start for putting faculty lines in IDED. And from
then on, we started doing that. And we, quite
truthfully, we gained some things with it, but we
also lost some of that ability to draw faculty from
wherever, even though we still do that. As you
know, I teach IDED courses. Dr. Christensen at
Agriculture Education teaches them. We draw from
various departments, but not to the degree that we
used to. Do you think that there's more
collaboration in that area, in this area, than
there is among other departments in the college?
Because I've noticed that there's not a whole lot,
as much as people would like, you know,
collaboration because of the fact that it's grown
so much and everybody's doing their thing.
There's a lot of specialty areas now, and people
are being hired just for one particular. I think
the interdisciplinary education program has
potential that was never realized because we
ended up making it a department rather than
keeping it interdisciplinary as a holding tank
for developing new programs. If we had kept it
truly interdisciplinary as a holding tank
mechanism, as a collaborative arrangement, it
would have served a better function maybe than
what it has where we have, in essence, made it a
department. Okay, as all of this has evolved, one
of the things that has happened and has been
happening not only in the college but at Texas A&M
is the tremendous growth. Has that affected the
way you work with students? I know I'm hearing
things like, A&M is getting, you know, the
standards are so high now that we're not getting
the students in that made A&M. They can't get in
anymore. How do you perceive, you know, what has
happened with students? Well, we might divide
that into two aspects, both at the undergraduate
level and at the graduate level. Okay. Let me speak
first to the graduate level. That's when I've been
most involved with the last couple of years, but
the graduate level, And we, especially in my role
here in the Department of Education, we pride
ourselves with the open door policy with a lot of
good student interactions. This morning I had a
student from New York that was here on campus and he
felt comfortable coming in and sitting here for an
hour talking about not only his academic program,
but also professional goals and some personal
problems and so forth. I think the academic rigor
of the department, the college, the university
can only enhance the graduate program. And I don't
see us being any less, in this department at least,
I think I have to underscore the word this
department, any less open to spending time with
the students in counseling and so forth. At the
undergraduate level, I'm afraid there's a couple
of things that are happening that maybe will have
some impact, and that's part of what you're
talking about, Sylvia, or Kim. Can the students
who used to major in industrial education now get
into the program? In industrial education, we are
unique in that we have many, many more seniors than
we have freshmen. In fact, we have many more second
semester juniors than we have first semester
juniors. It's at the end of the sophomore year, the
junior year, when people transfer from other
majors to industrial education. They have
finally convinced dad and mother and themselves
that engineering is probably not the best place
for them. Looking for other, maybe in terms of
academics, but the high theory that is needed in
engineering programs today. I feel that
industrial education, whether it be the teacher
certification program or whether it be the
industrial employment program, is an excellent
place for 20 students to come into if we could just
get them before they got in all the green point
problems. And I'm afraid, I'm afraid that the
academic standards are maybe going to be cutting
out some people that would be available for us in
that major. The counseling of students, again, we
pride ourselves in counseling with
undergraduate students. We are a small
department, so I think we are able to do more
individual counseling. Every faculty member
takes that as a personal responsibility. I think
as you look at our doors, you'll find the mentor,
the Aggie mentor name on most of our doors, more so
than any, percentage-wise, I'm sorry, I'm
certain it's more than most any other department.
some other departments in our college. I know that
most of the undergraduate advisement is done by
one or two people. And we, even though they're much
larger departments, ours is a smaller
department, we're all involved in that. We pride
ourselves in that. Because that's part of your
teaching. Absolutely. I mean, it's so important
to teaching. It's a part of it. I guess that's just a
part of the philosophy of our industrial
education. And maybe it's Ron and I, I think we
pride ourselves in our student contact. Does each
department have a philosophy as such? Whether
it's written down or not, probably not, but even if
there's a mission goal, even if there's a mission
goal and philosophical statement written, I
think more importantly there is a philosophy that
emerges. Can you capsulize that in your
department? Because I've only had one more
department. I didn't have that as a question. I
know that the mission or the goal of the College of
Education, but I haven't. I guess right now,
except for being student-oriented, there are at
least four things that are happening now in our
department that are somewhat a little hard to say
exactly the philosophy, the mission statement,
and so forth. And one of those, of course, would be
the change right now from department head to
interim department head to where we're going in
the future. And that's where we're going in the
future is one of the things that is very time
consuming on faculty, very frustrating on
students, and .
Is there any clue of where it might be headed at this
point? I think, as a faculty, I would hope that we
would stay intact as an administrative unit. We
are a nationally recognized program cluster. and
the dean has assured us that we are not going to be
dissolved but we've not seen that evidence and I
think that's a difference in the style of
leadership of the two deans. We need to evolve
where we're going before we have a new department
that's going to help us get there and I find that a
little bit awkward. So with that change there's
some awkwardness in it. With the change in the
whole a five-year program that we're changing the
total teacher education program within not only
the university but within the state. That is
another factor that is playing on the corridor.
And then, of course, the legislation thing. So we
have at least, I said four, but at least the three
would be state mandates, university changes,
departmental changes. Those three are ones that
are, but through it all, I think we can still say we
are very much a student Well, you answered a little
bit about the future. There's one that, if you
haven't picked up on your tape someplace, and you
might get this from some of the adult ed people,
about the off-campus mission of the college. One
of the things that we've done in adult and
extension and vocational education, more so than
other departments, is taken our program,
especially at the graduate level, to the people.
And you're familiar with this, of course, in San
Antonio. EDCI is now doing this somewhat, they're
taking some courses to Key and to Temple. But using
the off-campus instructional mode as a way of
meeting a need. I guess this is, again, maybe we can
talk about philosophy. Our philosophy is that we
do take part of our program to the constituent.
Again, trying to meet their individual needs, I
think, is an important philosophy rather than
that everybody must come here to be .
Well, it's been extremely helpful, and it's
growing by leaps and bounds. And it's a wonderful
service, because I don't know how a lot of these
people can possibly do it. And at least, even if
they have to come here ultimately, just the fact
that they have that linkage and they start with
that, then it's motivating to end up here
eventually, which is good. I
might hit a little bit of you already have on some of
the highlights and your contributions
specifically, and some insights and
observations. What about the future as the 21st
century emerges? Just for the College of
Education, do you have any kind of a perception of
where it might be? One of the things that I've used
is people have bemoaned the five-year program. If
we reflect back in earlier years, say my mother
graduated high school in May and started teaching
in September with a certificate by going to a
two-week workshop. In 1932, it was when the
University of Wisconsin-Stout and Stout State
Institute and Oswego in New York were two colleges
in industrial education that went from the
two-year normal school program to the four-year
baccalaureate program. I wonder what the debate
was in the mid-thirties about moving from a
two-year normal school to a four-year degree. I
imagine the debate was equally as lively as it is
today, moving from a four-year program to a five-
or a six-year program. I would judge that 20 years
from now, we will see the master's program, it
won't be that long, 10 years from now, we'll see the
master's program as much an integral part of the
teacher education program as we do the
baccalaureate today, and I draw the analogy to the
two-year normal school syndrome of years past. I
think what I keep hearing from people that are out
there is, you know, because teachers are not paid,
you know, in comparison to some of the other
professions, how do you justify making them have
to stay five years in college as expensive as
college costs or as much as college costs are
rising when they're going to come out making
$18,000? You know, that's where I think there's a
lot of this, you know, fear that people are just
It's very hard to recruit for the College of
Education right now because the counselors are
saying, you know, kids don't want to go into
education. And that's a, you know, we've got to
overcome that. It's one of these kids don't want
to. It's one of these self-fulfilling
prophecies. We're right now looking at a
mentorship minority recruitment proposal. And
we're looking at a minority recruitment
proposal. in which we're wanting to write in
mentors in there. I just wrote down Fidel Castillo
as an industrial education mentor. And looking at
individuals out there of any ethnic background
that would recruit people into the profession.
And I think the teachers are needed to have a more
positive attitude. I might reflect back on the
Interdisciplinary Education Program. There
were, for a number of years, the students who were
associated with the Interdisciplinary
Education Program, adult education students,
vocational education students, thought they had
the best of both worlds. They were really, really
very positive about the program they were in. And
then we got a couple of faculty members in who were
associated with IDED who wondered who they were,
where they were, what department. They were
searching for identity of the department. And
Sylvia, that immediately, the graduate students
in that department had questions. Who are we?
Where are we? Where do we belong? And two years
before that, they were very positive. But the
influence of two faculty members who asked that
question influenced the whole group. I agree.
There's one that's not on tape, but it needs to be on
there, and that's one of the most rewarding
experiences I've had, and that was working with
the College of Education Development Council and
being the Associate Dean for Research during the
initial evolutionary days of that. And I think
this is a program that will be a function a
committee, a council that will assist us in two
ways as we continue to evolve to the future. One is
in funding, which of course is one reason for the
Development Council. But the other is we're using
our Development Council in the College of
Education is also for, because we don't have
advisory committees, industrial advisory
committees and so forth, we're also using the
Development Council as a programmatic advisor
sometimes. But I think that the assistance that we
get from the quality of people we have on advisory
council can't help but be a positive influence on
both the programmatic thrust as well as the where
we're all to get to. And it's very important to keep
that momentum that started when you had it. And I
feel it's like being part of the beginning and
being a part of it now. I feel like we need something
to get everybody together and keep that momentum,
because that's so important. Otherwise, people
start to play. And we have some fantastic people in
there that can just really benefit a lot. When this
study is done, and maybe 20 years from now, when
somebody has to take an ed-ad course and pick up a
dissertation and study or evaluate, and they read
about the history of the College of Education, is
there something that you would like in there that
would be just a statement of your contribution or
what you would like to be remembered down the line
as something that was meaningful. I've
highlighted two things. One was the opportunity
to be at the right place at the right time during
the expansion time of the college where we could
use
fairly good appropriated dollars. soft money
dollars, contracting grant dollars to help
evolve additional programs in the college and
then to be able to see them evolve into full fully
funded programs. One that I mentioned before was
Bob Riley's college student program. He had a
funded project for that that also assisted in
evolving that program to where it is today. And
then the other ones I just now mentioned was the
Development Council, I'd like to, I wonder what
the history, you and I both wonder what the history
of that council will be 20 years from now. That's
right, but it was exciting to have been on the
ground floor, and I know I feel very fortunate to
have been chosen, and I still don't know how that
ever happened. I thank you, Dr. Barker. This has
been very informative and very interesting, and I
look forward to visiting some more.